---
layout: post
author: Martin Trifonov
---
Hi, It's Monday, I'm Martin, and this is math.  
Today's theorem is called the **fundamental theorem on symmetric polynomials**. I first encountered this theorem in my attempt to retrace the historical development of Galois theory, where it kept making appearances in various proofs. My gut tells me its an important theorem, so I want to show it to you. 

Okay, enough babbling, lets go meet our theorem.

### Meet the theorem
Let $f(x) = x^n+c_{n-1}x^{n-1}+...+c_0 = 0$ be some rational equation, and let $\alpha_1,..,\alpha_n \in \mathbb C$ be its roots.
At its core, todays theorem is concerned with relating the roots of our polynomial with its coefficients.

Before we spell out the exact statement of the theorem, let's make the following innocent observation. Instead of writing  $f(x) = x^n+c_{n-1}x^{n-1}+...+c_0$, we could factorise it as $f(x)=(x-\alpha_1)...(x-\alpha_n)$. If we now were to expand the latter expression, we would get $f(x) = x^n-(\alpha_1+...+\alpha_n)x^{n-1}+...+(-1)^n\alpha_1...\alpha_n$.
This allows us to capture the following relations between roots $\alpha_1,...,\alpha_n$ and coefficients $c_{n-1},...,c_0$:
$$\alpha_1+...+\alpha_n = -c_{n-1}\\\vdots\\\alpha_1\cdots\alpha_n =(-1)^nc_0$$
Thus, even though the roots of our equation might not be known to us, at the very least, we know they satisfy the above constraints. The left-hand-sides of the above identities are called the _elementary symmetric polynomials_ in $\alpha_1,...,\alpha_n$. By symmetric, it is meant that we could permute the roots in the expression in any way whatsoever, and the algebraic value of the expression will not change.

Today's theorem builds right on top on these observations. The juiciest way to present it is the following:
> Let $f(x) = x^n+c_{n-1}x^{n-1}+...+c_0 = 0$ be some equation, and let $\alpha_1,..,\alpha_n$ be its roots.  Any _symmetric_ polynomial $g(\alpha_1,...,\alpha_n)$ in the roots can be converted into a polynomial $h(c_0,...,c_{n-1})$ in the coefficients by a simple algorithm, so that $g(\alpha_1,...,\alpha_n) = h(c_0,...,c_{n-1})$   

We already gave an obvious example of the theorem. The polynomial $\alpha_1+...+\alpha_n$ is symmetric in the roots of our equation (no permutation of the roots changes its value), and it can be expressed as a polynomial $-c_{n-1}$ (albeit, a very stupid one) in the coefficients of the equation. The theorem goes much further though. I could come up with some other expression in the roots of our equation, say $\alpha_1^5+...+\alpha_n^5$, and this value must also be expressible as some rational combination of our coefficients.

**Let's make it super concrete**. Suppose my equation is $5x^3-2x+1$. It's roots, $\alpha_1,..,\alpha_3$, real or complex, whatever they are, are not known to me. However, by means of an algorithm we're about to describe, we will be able to determine the exact value of the expression $(\alpha_1^2+\alpha_2^2+\alpha_3^2)(\alpha_1\alpha_2+\alpha_1\alpha_3+\alpha_2\alpha_3)$ as a rational expression in the coefficients $5,-2,1$.
### The algorithm
### Newtons Theorem
### Properties of symmetric polynomials
Let's investigate the nature of symmetric polynomials. 
Supose we start with any polynomial $f(x_1,...,x_n)$. For simple polynomials, it is easy to determine if they are symmetric at a glance. 
$$2x^2+2y^2+2z^2 \in \mathbb Q[x,y,z] \text{ is symmetric}$$
But what about more complicated expressions?
$$2xy^3(x^2+z)(y+x^2)$$
Let's consider the following algorithm to determine the symmetry of polynomials:
>1. Fully expand out your given polynomial, so that it is written as sum of monomials. Example:  
$2xy^3(x^2+z)(y+x^2)=2 x^5 y^3 + 2 x^3 y^4 + 2 x^3 y^3 z + 2 x y^4 z$
>2. For the first monomial in your expression, say $x^5y^3 = x^5y^3z^0$, generate all distinct monomials that can be obtained by permuting the variables, in this case:  
$x^5y^3z^0,x^5z^3y^0,y^5x^3z^0,y^5z^3y^0,z^5x^3y^0,z^5y^3x^0$  
If all monomials exist in the expression and share the same coefficients, then cross them of from the expression and repeat step 2. If some monomial doesn't exist, or if two monomials have different coefficients, the polynomial isn't symmetric.     


The important takeaway here is that monomials can be grouped together in the specified way. They are, in some sense, the building blocks of symmetric polynomials. We can identify these building blocks in the following way:
5-3-0 shall denote the symmetric polynomial 
$$x^5y^3z^0+x^5z^3y^0+y^5x^3z^0+y^5z^3y^0+z^5x^3y^0+z^5y^3x^0$$
whereas 1-0-0 denotes
$$x+y+z$$
The elementary symmetric polynomials are exactly 1-0-0,1-1-0,1-1-1.
Now there is a slightly larger class of symmetric polynomials generated by the elementary symmetric polynomials, which we will show now: 


### Newtons Theorem
>The symmetric polynomials of the form
>$$s_k =\alpha_1^k+\alpha_2^k+...+\alpha_n^k$$
>can be expressed in terms of the elementary symmetric polynomials $\sigma_1,...,\sigma_n$.
___
Proof.  
The polynomials $s_k$ are exactly those described by k-0-0.
There is a natural law here, which says:
(k-1-0)()
### The general proof
### Outlook